[
     'Do you have any colleagues at work who have come to live in [country] from another country?PROMPT IN RELATION TO PRECODES',
 'CARD 40Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly ...[country] has more than its fair share of people applying for refugee statusREAD OUT',
 'CARD 40Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly ...While their applications for refugee status are being considered, people should be allowed to work in [country]READ OUT',
 "CARD 40Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly ...The government should be generous in judging people's applications for refugee statusREAD OUT",
 "CARD 40Some people come to this country and apply for refugee status on the grounds that they fear persecution in their own country. Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly...Most applicants for refugee status aren't in real fear of persecution in their own countriesREAD OUT",
 'CARD 40Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly ...While their cases are being considered, applicants should be kept in detention centresREAD OUT',
 'CARD 40Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly ...While their cases are being considered, the [country] government should give financial support to applicantsREAD OUT',
 'CARD 40Some people come to this country and apply for refugee status on the grounds that they fear persecution in their own country. Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly...Refugees whose applications are granted should be entitled to bring in their close family membersREAD OUT',
     'CARD 34Think of two people, one earning twice as much as the other. Which of the three statements on this card comes closest to how you think they should be taxed?CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'CARD 31Still thinking about the provision of social benefits and services, please tell me how efficient you think the provision of health care in [country] is. Choose your answer from this card where 0 means extremely inefficient and 10 means extremely efficient.',
 'STILL CARD 31And how efficient do you think the tax authorities are at things like handling queries on time, avoiding mistakes and preventing fraud? Please use this card where 0 means they are extremely inefficient in doing their job and 10 means they are extremely efficient.',
 'CARD 32Using this card, please tell me whether you think doctors and nurses in [country] give special advantages to certain people or deal with everyone equally? Choose your answer from this card where 0 means you think they give special advantages to certain people and 10 means you think they deal with everyone equally.',
 'STILL CARD 32And using the same card, please tell me whether you think the tax authorities in [country] give special advantages to certain people or deal with everyone equally?',
 'CARD 33Many social benefits and services are paid for by taxes. If the government had to choose between increasing taxes and spending more on social benefits and services, or decreasing taxes and spending less on social benefits and services, which should they do?Choose your answer from this card.',
 'CARD 34Think of two people, one earning twice as much as the other. Which of the three statements on this card comes closest to how you think they should be taxed?CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'CARD 35Some people say that higher earners should get larger old age pensions because they have paid in more. Others say that lower earners should get larger old age pensions because their needs are greater. Which of the three statements on this card comes closest to your view?CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'CARD 36Some people say that higher earners should get more benefit when they are temporarily unemployed because they paid more in tax, whilst others think that lower earners should get more because they are in greater need. Using this card, please tell me which of the three statements you agree with most?CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'CARD 37Thinking of people coming to live in [country] from other countries, when do you think they should obtain the same rights to social benefits and services as citizens already living here? Please choose the option on this card that comes closest to your view.CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'CARD 38A lot of people who come to live in [country] from other countries pay taxes and make use of social benefits and services. On balance, do you think people who come to live in [country] receive more than they contribute or contribute more than they receive? Please use this card where 0 means they receive much more and 10 means they contribute much more.',
 
    
    'Title of dataset',
 'ESS round',
 'Edition',
 'Production date',
 "Respondent's identification number",
 'Country',
 'Design weight',
 'Post-stratification weight including design weight',
 'Population size weight (must be combined with dweight or pspwght)',
 'Analysis weight',
 'News about politics and current affairs, watching, reading or listening, in minutesOn a typical day, about how much time do you spend watching, reading or listening to news about politics and current affairs?Please give your answer in hours and minutes. INTERVIEWER: If no time spent, enter 00 00. WRITE IN DURATION',
 'Internet use, how oftenCARD 1People can use the internet on different devices such as computers, tablets and smartphones. How often do you use the internet on these or any other devices, whether for work or personal use?',
 'Internet use, how much time on typical day, in minutesASK IF MOST DAYS OR EVERY DAY AT A2 (code 4 or 5)On a typical day, about how much time do you spend using the internet on a computer, tablet, smartphone or other device, whether for work or personal use?Please give your answer in hours and minutes. INTERVIEWER: WRITE IN DURATION',
 "Most people can be trusted or you can't be too carefulASK ALL CARD 2Using this card, generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can't be too careful and 10 means that most people can be trusted.",
 'Most people try to take advantage of you, or try to be fairCARD 3Using this card, do you think that most people would try to take advantage of you if they got the chance, or would they try to be fair?',
 'Most of the time people helpful or mostly looking out for themselvesCARD 4Would you say that most of the time people try to be helpful or that they are mostly looking out for themselves?Please use this card.',
 'How interested in politicsHow interested would you say you are in politics - are you...READ OUT...',
 'Political system allows people to have a say in what government doesCARD 5How much would you say the political system in [country] allows people like you to have a say in what the government does?',
 'Able to take active role in political groupCARD 6How able do you think you are to take an active role in a group involved with political issues?',
 'Political system allows people to have influence on politicsCARD 7And how much would you say that the political system in [country] allows people like you to have an influence on politics?',
 'Confident in own ability to participate in politicsCARD 8And how confident are you in your own ability to participate in politics?',
 'Trust in the legal systemCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...the legal system?READ OUT...',
 'Trust in the policeCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...the police?READ OUT...',
 'Trust in politiciansCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...politicians?READ OUT...',
 'Trust in the European ParliamentCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...the European Parliament?READ OUT...',
 'Trust in the United NationsCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...the United Nations?READ OUT...',
 'Trust in political partiesCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...political parties?READ OUT...',
 "Trust in country's parliamentCARD 9Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much you personally trust each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all, and 10 means you have complete trust. Firstly... ...[country]'s parliament?READ OUT...",
 "Voted last national electionSome people don't vote nowadays for one reason or another. Did you vote in the last [country] national election in [month/year]?",
 'Party voted for in last national election, AustriaWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Austria)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, BelgiumWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Belgium)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, SwitzerlandWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Switzerland)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, CzechiaWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Czechia)',
 'Party voted for in last national election 1, GermanyWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Germany 1)',
 'Party voted for in last national election 2, GermanyWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Germany 2)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, EstoniaWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Estonia)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, SpainWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Spain)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, FinlandWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Finland)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, France (ballot 1)Which party did you vote for in that election? (France)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, United KingdomWhich party did you vote for in that election? (United Kingdom)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, HungaryWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Hungary)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, IrelandWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Ireland)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, IsraelWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Israel)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, IcelandWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Iceland)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, ItalyWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Italy)',
 'Party voted for in last national election 1, Lithuania (first vote, party)Which party did you vote for in that election? (Lithuania 1)',
 'Party voted for in last national election 2, Lithuania (second vote, party)Which party did you vote for in that election? (Lithuania 2)',
 'Party voted for in last national election 3, Lithuania (third vote, party)Which party did you vote for in that election? (Lithuania 3)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, NetherlandsWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Netherlands)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, NorwayWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Norway)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, PolandWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Poland)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, PortugalWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Portugal)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, Russian FederationWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Russian Federation)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, SwedenWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Sweden)',
 'Party voted for in last national election, SloveniaWhich party did you vote for in that election? (Slovenia)',
 'Contacted politician or government official last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...contacted a politician, government or local government official?READ OUT',
 'Worked in political party or action group last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...worked in a political party or action group?READ OUT',
 'Worked in another organisation or association last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...worked in another organisation or association?READ OUT',
 'Worn or displayed campaign badge/sticker last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...worn or displayed a campaign badge/sticker?READ OUT',
 'Signed petition last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...signed a petition?READ OUT',
 'Taken part in lawful public demonstration last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...taken part in a lawful public demonstration?READ OUT',
 'Boycotted certain products last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...boycotted certain products?READ OUT',
 'Posted or shared anything about politics online last 12 monthsASK ALLThere are different ways of trying to improve things in [country] or help prevent things from going wrong. During the last 12 months, have you done any of the following? Have you... ...posted or shared anything about politics online, for example on blogs, via email or on social media such as Facebook or Twitter?READ OUT',
 'Feel closer to a particular party than all other partiesIs there a particular political party you feel closer to than all the other parties?',
 'Which party feel closer to, AustriaWhich one? (Austria)',
 'Which party feel closer to, BelgiumWhich one? (Belgium)',
 'Which party feel closer to, SwitzerlandWhich one? (Switzerland)',
 'Which party feel closer to, CzechiaWhich one? (Czechia)',
 'Which party feel closer to, GermanyWhich one? (Germany)',
 'Which party feel closer to, EstoniaWhich one? (Estonia)',
 'Which party feel closer to, SpainWhich one? (Spain)',
 'Which party feel closer to, FinlandWhich one? (Finland)',
 'Which party feel closer to, FranceWhich one? (France)',
 'Which party feel closer to, United KingdomWhich one? (United Kingdom)',
 'Which party feel closer to, HungaryWhich one? (Hungary)',
 'Which party feel closer to, IrelandWhich one? (Ireland)',
 'Which party feel closer to, IsraelWhich one? (Israel)',
 'Which party feel closer to, IcelandWhich one? (Iceland)',
 'Which party feel closer to, ItalyWhich one? (Italy)',
 'Which party feel closer to, LithuaniaWhich one? (Lithuania)',
 'Which party feel closer to, NetherlandsWhich one? (Netherlands)',
 'Which party feel closer to, NorwayWhich one? (Norway)',
 'Which party feel closer to, PolandWhich one? (Poland)',
 'Which party feel closer to, PortugalWhich one? (Portugal)',
 'Which party feel closer to, Russian FederationWhich one? (Russian Federation)',
 'Which party feel closer to, SwedenWhich one? (Sweden)',
 'Which party feel closer to, SloveniaWhich one? (Slovenia)',
 'How close to partyASK IF PARTY GIVEN AT B24 (codes 01 to xx)How close do you feel to this party? Do you feel that you are ...READ OUT...',
 "Placement on left right scaleASK ALL CARD 10In politics people sometimes talk of 'left' and 'right'. Using this card, where would you place yourself on this scale, where 0 means the left and 10 means the right?",
 'How satisfied with life as a wholeCARD 11All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole nowadays? Please answer using this card, where 0 means extremely dissatisfied and 10 means extremely satisfied.',
 'How satisfied with present state of economy in countrySTILL CARD 11On the whole how satisfied are you with the present state of the economy in [country]?Still use this card.',
 'How satisfied with the national governmentSTILL CARD 11Now thinking about the [country] government, how satisfied are you with the way it is doing its job?Still use this card.',
 'How satisfied with the way democracy works in countrySTILL CARD 11And on the whole, how satisfied are you with the way democracy works in [country]?Still use this card.',
 'State of education in country nowadaysCARD 12Now, using this card, please say what you think overall about the state of education in [country] nowadays?',
 'State of health services in country nowadaysSTILL CARD 12Still using this card, please say what you think overall about the state of health services in [country] nowadays?',
 'Government should reduce differences in income levelsCARD 13Using this card, please say to what extent you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. The government should take measures to reduce differences in income levelsREAD OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Men should have more right to job than women when jobs are scarceCARD 13Using this card, please say to what extent you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Gays and lesbians free to live life as they wishCARD 13Using this card, please say to what extent you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. Gay men and lesbians should be free to live their own life as they wishREAD OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Ashamed if close family member gay or lesbianCARD 13Using this card, please say to what extent you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. If a close family member was a gay man or a lesbian, I would feel ashamed.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Gay and lesbian couples right to adopt childrenCARD 13Using this card, please say to what extent you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. Gay male and lesbian couples should have the same rights to adopt children as straight couples.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'European Union: European unification go further or gone too farCARD 14Now thinking about the European Union, some say European unification should go further. Others say it has already gone too far. Using this card, what number on the scale best describes your position?',
 'Allow many/few immigrants of same race/ethnic group as majorityCARD 15Now, using this card, to what extent do you think [country] should allow people of the same race or ethnic group as most [country] people to come and live here?',
 'Allow many/few immigrants of different race/ethnic group from majoritySTILL CARD 15How about people of a different race or ethnic group from most [country] people?Still use this card.',
 'Allow many/few immigrants from poorer countries outside EuropeSTILL CARD 15How about people from the poorer countries outside Europe?Use the same card.',
 "Immigration bad or good for country's economyCARD 16Would you say it is generally bad or good for [country]'s economy that people come to live here from other countries?Please use this card.",
 "Country's cultural life undermined or enriched by immigrantsCARD 17And, using this card, would you say that [country]'s cultural life is generally undermined or enriched by people coming to live here from other countries?",
 'Immigrants make country worse or better place to liveCARD 18Is [country] made a worse or a better place to live by people coming to live here from other countries?Please use this card.',
 'How happy are youCARD 19Taking all things together, how happy would you say you are?Please use this card',
 'How often socially meet with friends, relatives or colleaguesCARD 20Using this card, how often do you meet socially with friends, relatives or work colleagues?',
 'How many people with whom you can discuss intimate and personal mattersCARD 21How many people, if any, are there with whom you can discuss intimate and personal matters?Choose your answer from this card.',
 'Take part in social activities compared to others of same ageCARD 22Compared to other people of your age, how often would you say you take part in social activities?Please use this card.',
 'Respondent or household member victim of burglary/assault last 5 yearsHave you or a member of your household been the victim of a burglary or assault in the last 5 years?',
 'Feeling of safety of walking alone in local area after darkHow safe do you - or would you - feel walking alone in this area after dark? Do - or would - you feel...READ OUT...',
 'Subjective general healthHow is your health in general? Would you say it is ...READ OUT...',
 'Hampered in daily activities by illness/disability/infirmity/mental problemAre you hampered in your daily activities in any way by any longstanding illness, or disability, infirmity or mental health problem? If yes, is that a lot or to some extent?',
 'How emotionally attached to [country]CARD 23How emotionally attached do you feel to [country]? Please choose a number from 0 to 10, where 0 means not at all emotionally attached and 10 means very emotionally attached.',
 'How emotionally attached to EuropeSTILL CARD 23And how emotionally attached do you feel to Europe?',
 'Belonging to particular religion or denominationDo you consider yourself as belonging to any particular religion or denomination?',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at presentASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one?',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, AustriaASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Austria)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, BelgiumASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Belgium)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, SwitzerlandASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Switzerland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, GermanyASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Germany)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, FinlandASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Finland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, United KingdomASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (United Kingdom)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, HungaryASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Hungary)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, IrelandASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Ireland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, IcelandASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Iceland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, LithuaniaASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Lithuania)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, NetherlandsASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Netherlands)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, NorwayASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Norway)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, PolandASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Poland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to at present, SwedenASK IF YES AT C11 (code 1)Which one? (Sweden)',
 "Ever belonging to particular religion or denominationASK IF NO RELIGION/DENOMINATION OR DON'T KNOW/REFUSAL AT C11 (codes 2, 7 or 8 at C11)Have you ever considered yourself as belonging to any particular religion or denomination?",
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the pastASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one?',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, AustriaASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Austria)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, BelgiumASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Belgium)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, SwitzerlandASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Switzerland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, GermanyASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Germany)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, FinlandASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Finland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, United KingdomASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (United Kingdom)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, HungaryASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Hungary)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, IrelandASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Ireland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, IcelandASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Iceland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, LithuaniaASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Lithuania)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, NetherlandsASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Netherlands)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, NorwayASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Norway)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, PolandASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Poland)',
 'Religion or denomination belonging to in the past, SwedenASK IF YES AT C13 (code 1)Which one? (Sweden)',
 'How religious are youASK ALL CARD 24Regardless of whether you belong to a particular religion, how religious would you say you are?Please use this card.',
 'How often attend religious services apart from special occasionsCARD 25Apart from special occasions such as weddings and funerals, about how often do you attend religious services nowadays?Please use this card.',
 'How often pray apart from at religious servicesSTILL CARD 25Apart from when you are at religious services, how often, if at all, do you pray?Please use this card.',
 'Member of a group discriminated against in this countryWould you describe yourself as being a member of a group that is discriminated against in this country?',
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: colour or raceASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? Colour or racePROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: nationalityASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? NationalityPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: religionASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? ReligionPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: languageASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? LanguagePROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: ethnic groupASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? Ethnic groupPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: ageASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? AgePROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: genderASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? GenderPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: sexualityASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? SexualityPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: disabilityASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? DisabilityPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: other groundsASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? OtherPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: don't knowASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? Don't knowPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: refusalASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? RefusalPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: not applicableASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? Not applicablePROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 "Discrimination of respondent's group: no answerASK IF YES AT C18 (code 1)On what grounds is your group discriminated against? No answerPROBE: 'What other grounds?' CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 'Citizen of countryASK ALLAre you a citizen of [country]?',
 'CitizenshipASK IF NO OR DON’T KNOW AT C20 (codes 2 or 8)What citizenship do you hold?WRITE IN',
 'Born in countryASK ALLWere you born in [country]?',
 'Country of birthASK IF NO AT C22 (code 2)In which country were you born?WRITE IN',
 'What year you first came to live in countryWhat year did you first come to live in [country]?WRITE IN YEAR:',
 'Language most often spoken at home: first mentionedASK ALLWhat language or languages do you speak most often at home? Language 1WRITE IN UP TO 2 LANGUAGES',
 'Language most often spoken at home: second mentionedASK ALLWhat language or languages do you speak most often at home? Language 2WRITE IN UP TO 2 LANGUAGES',
 'Belong to minority ethnic group in countryDo you belong to a minority ethnic group in [country]?',
 'Father born in countryWas your father born in [country]?',
 'Country of birth, fatherASK IF NO AT C27 (code 2)In which country was your father born?WRITE IN',
 'Mother born in countryASK ALLWas your mother born in [country]?',
 'Country of birth, motherASK IF NO AT C29 (code 2)In which country was your mother born?WRITE IN',
 "Government should be generous judging applications for refugee statusASK ALL CARD 31Some people come to this country and apply for refugee status on the grounds that they fear persecution in their own country. Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly...The government should be generous in judging people's applications for refugee statusREAD OUT",
 "Most refugee applicants not in real fear of persecution own countriesASK ALL CARD 31Some people come to this country and apply for refugee status on the grounds that they fear persecution in their own country. Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly...Most applicants for refugee status aren't in real fear of persecution in their own countriesREAD OUT",
 'Granted refugees should be entitled to bring close family membersASK ALL CARD 31Some people come to this country and apply for refugee status on the grounds that they fear persecution in their own country. Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with the following statements. Firstly...Refugees whose applications are granted should be entitled to bring in their close family membersREAD OUT',
 'How likely to buy most energy efficient home applianceASK ALL CARD 32If you were to buy a large electrical appliance for your home, how likely is it that you would buy one of the most energy efficient ones?',
 'How often do things to reduce energy useCARD 33There are some things that can be done to reduce energy use, such as switching off appliances that are not being used, walking for short journeys, or only using the heating or air conditioning when really needed. In your daily life, how often do you do things to reduce your energy use?',
 'How confident you could use less energy than nowCARD 34Overall, how confident are you that you could use less energy than you do now?',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from coalCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? First, how much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from coal?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from natural gasCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? And how about natural gas?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from hydroelectric powerCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? And how about hydroelectric power generated by flowing water from rivers, dams and seas?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from nuclear powerCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated by nuclear power?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from solar powerCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? And how about sun or solar power?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from wind powerCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? And how about wind power?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How much electricity in [country] should be generated from biomass energyCARD 35The highlighted box at the top of this card shows a number of energy sources that can be used to generate electricity. Please take a moment to look over them. How much of the electricity used in [country] should be generated from each energy source? And how about biomass energy generated from materials like, wood, plants and animal waste?INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO ALLOW RESPONDENT TO READ THE LIST. Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of this card.',
 'How worried, power cutsCARD 36How worried are you that there may be power cuts in [country]?',
 'How worried, energy too expensive for many peopleThe next few questions are about energy people use at home for things such as heating, lighting, cooking and electrical appliances. STILL CARD 36How worried are you that energy may be too expensive for many people in [country]?',
 'How worried, [country] too dependent on energy importsSTILL CARD 36How worried are you about [country] being too dependent on energy imports from other countries?',
 'How worried, [country] too dependent on fossil fuelsSTILL CARD 36How worried are you about [country] being too dependent on using energy generated by fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal?',
 'How worried, energy supply interrupted by natural disasters or extreme weatherSTILL CARD 36How worried are you that energy supplies could be interrupted... ...by natural disasters or extreme weather?READ OUT...',
 'How worried, energy supply interrupted by insufficient power generatedSTILL CARD 36How worried are you that energy supplies could be interrupted? ...and by insufficient power being generated?READ OUT...',
 'How worried, energy supply interrupted by technical failuresSTILL CARD 36How worried are you that energy supplies could be interrupted? ...and by technical failures?READ OUT...',
 'How worried, energy supply interrupted by terrorist attacksSTILL CARD 36And how worried are you that energy supplies could be interrupted by terrorist attacks?',
 "Do you think world's climate is changingCARD 37You may have heard the idea that the world's climate is changing due to increases in temperature over the past 100 years. What is your personal opinion on this? Do you think the world's climate is changing?Choose your answer from this card.",
 'How much thought about climate change before todayASK IF DEFINITELY NOT CHANGING AT D19 (code 4) CARD 38How much have you thought about climate change before today?',
 'How much thought about climate change before todayCARD 38How much have you thought about climate change before today?',
 'Climate change caused by natural processes, human activity, or bothCARD 39Do you think that climate change is caused by natural processes, human activity, or both?',
 'To what extent feel personal responsibility to reduce climate changeCARD 40To what extent do you feel a personal responsibility to try to reduce climate change?',
 'How worried about climate changeCARD 41How worried are you about climate change?',
 'Climate change good or bad impact across worldCARD 42How good or bad do you think the impact of climate change will be on people across the world? Please choose a number from 0 to 10, where 0 is extremely bad and 10 is extremely good.',
 'Imagine large numbers of people limit energy use, how likely reduce climate changeCARD 43Now imagine that large numbers of people limited their energy use. How likely do you think it is that this would reduce climate change?',
 'How likely, large numbers of people limit energy useSTILL CARD 43How likely do you think it is that large numbers of people will limit their energy use to try to reduce climate change?',
 'How likely, governments in enough countries take action to reduce climate changeSTILL CARD 43And how likely do you think it is that governments in enough countries will take action that reduces climate change?',
 'How likely, limiting own energy use reduce climate changeSTILL CARD 43How likely do you think it is that limiting your own energy use would help reduce climate change?',
 'Favour increase taxes on fossil fuels to reduce climate changeASK ALL CARD 44To what extent are you in favour or against the following policies in [country] to reduce climate change? Increasing taxes on fossil fuels, such as oil, gas and coal.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Favour subsidise renewable energy to reduce climate changeASK ALL CARD 44To what extent are you in favour or against the following policies in [country] to reduce climate change? Using public money to subsidise renewable energy such as wind and solar power.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Favour ban sale of least energy efficient household appliances to reduce climate changeASK ALL CARD 44To what extent are you in favour or against the following policies in [country] to reduce climate change? A law banning the sale of the least energy efficient household appliances.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 "Large differences in income acceptable to reward talents and effortsCARD 45Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. Large differences in people's incomes are acceptable to properly reward differences in talents and efforts.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID",
 "For fair society, differences in standard of living should be smallCARD 45Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with each of the following statements. For a society to be fair, differences in people's standard of living should be small.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID",
 'Of every 100 working age how many unemployed and looking for workCARD 46Of every 100 people of working age in [country] how many would you say are unemployed and looking for work? Choose your answer from this card. If you are not sure please give your best guess.',
 'Standard of living of pensionersCARD 47Using this card, what do you think overall about the standard of living of pensioners? Please tell me on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means extremely bad and 10 means extremely good.',
 'Standard of living of unemployedSTILL CARD 47What do you think overall about the standard of living of people who are unemployed?Use the same card',
 "Standard of living for the old, governments' responsibilityCARD 48People have different views on what the responsibilities of governments should or should not be. For each of the tasks I read out please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much responsibility you think governments should have. 0 means it should not be governments? responsibility at all and 10 means it should be entirely governments? responsibility. Firstly to? ...ensure a reasonable standard of living for the old?READ OUT...",
 "Standard of living for the unemployed, governments' responsibilityCARD 48People have different views on what the responsibilities of governments should or should not be. For each of the tasks I read out please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much responsibility you think governments should have. 0 means it should not be governments? responsibility at all and 10 means it should be entirely governments? responsibility. Firstly to... ...ensure a reasonable standard of living for the unemployed?READ OUT...",
 "Child care services for working parents, governments' responsibilityCARD 48People have different views on what the responsibilities of governments should or should not be. For each of the tasks I read out please tell me on a score of 0-10 how much responsibility you think governments should have. 0 means it should not be governments? responsibility at all and 10 means it should be entirely governments? responsibility. Firstly to... ...ensure sufficient child care services for working parents?READ OUT...",
 'Social benefits/services place too great strain on economyCARD 49Using this card please tell me to what extent you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....place too great a strain on the economy?READ OUT...',
 'Social benefits/services prevent widespread povertyCARD 49Using this card please tell me to what extent you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....prevent widespread poverty?READ OUT...',
 'Social benefits/services lead to a more equal societyCARD 49Using this card please tell me to what extent you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....lead to a more equal society?READ OUT...',
 'Social benefits/services cost businesses too much in taxes/chargesCARD 49Using this card please tell me to what extent you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....cost businesses too much in taxes and charges?READ OUT...',
 'Social benefits/services make people lazySTILL CARD 49And to what extent do you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....make people lazy?READ OUT...',
 'Social benefits/services make people less willing care for one anotherSTILL CARD 49And to what extent do you agree or disagree that social benefits and services in [country]... ....make people less willing to care for one another?READ OUT...',
 'When should immigrants obtain rights to social benefits/servicesCARD 50Thinking of people coming to live in [country] from other countries, when do you think they should obtain the same rights to social benefits and services as citizens already living here? Please choose the option on this card that comes closest to your view.CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'Most unemployed people do not really try to find a jobCARD 51Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with each of the following statements about people in [country]. Most unemployed people do not really try to find a job.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Many with very low incomes get less benefit than legally entitled toCARD 51Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with each of the following statements about people in [country]. Many people with very low incomes get less benefit than they are legally entitled to.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Many manage to obtain benefits/services not entitled toCARD 51Using this card, please say how much you agree or disagree with each of the following statements about people in [country]. Many people manage to obtain benefits and services to which they are not entitled.READ OUT EACH STATEMENT AND CODE IN GRID',
 'Administration of unemployment benefits questionsIf automated random allocation not used: Interviewer code: interviewer refer to month of respondent birthday and code.',
 'Unemployment benefit if turn down job: less payASK IF CODE 1 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it pays a lot less than they earned previously?READ OUT',
 'Unemployment benefit if turn down job: lower level of educationASK IF CODE 1 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it needs a much lower level of education than the person has?READ OUT',
 'Unemployment benefit if turn down job: refuse unpaid workASK IF CODE 1 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they refuse to regularly carry out unpaid work in the area where they live in return for unemployment benefit?READ OUT',
 'Someone in their 50s, unemployment benefit if turn down job: less payASK IF CODE 2 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone in their 50s who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if? ...they turn down a job because it pays a lot less than they earned previously?READ OUT',
 'Someone In their 50s, unemployment benefit if turn down job: lower level of educationASK IF CODE 2 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone in their 50s who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if? ...they turn down a job because it needs a much lower level of education than the person has?READ OUT',
 'Someone in their 50s, unemployment benefit if turn down job: refuse unpaid workASK IF CODE 2 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone in their 50s who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if? ...they refuse to regularly carry out unpaid work in the area where they live in return for unemployment benefit?READ OUT',
 'Someone aged 20-25, unemployment benefit if turn down job: less payASK IF CODE 3 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone aged 20-25 who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it pays a lot less than they earned previously?READ OUT',
 'Someone aged 20-25, unemployment benefit if turn down job: lower level of educationASK IF CODE 3 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone aged 20-25 who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it needs a much lower level of education than the person has?READ OUT',
 'Someone aged 20-25, unemployment benefit if turn down job: refuse unpaid workASK IF CODE 3 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine someone aged 20-25 who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they refuse to regularly carry out unpaid work in the area where they live in return for unemployment benefit?READ OUT',
 'Single parent to 3-year-old, unemployment benefit if turn down job: less payASK IF CODE 4 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine a single parent with a 3-year-old child who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it pays a lot less than they earned previously?READ OUT',
 'Single parent to 3-year-old, unemployment benefit if turn down job: lower level of educationASK IF CODE 4 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine a single parent with a 3-year-old child who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they turn down a job because it needs a much lower level of education than the person has?READ OUT',
 'Single parent to 3-year-old, unemployment benefit if turn down job: refuse unpaid workASK IF CODE 4 AT E20 CARD 52Imagine a single parent with a 3-year-old child who is unemployed and looking for work. This person was previously working but lost their job and is now receiving unemployment benefit. What do you think should happen to this person?s unemployment benefit if... ...they refuse to regularly carry out unpaid work in the area where they live in return for unemployment benefit?READ OUT',
 'Social benefits only for people with lowest incomesASK ALL CARD 53Would you be against or in favour of the government providing social benefits and services only for people with the lowest incomes, while people with middle and higher incomes are responsible for themselves?',
 'Spend more on education for unemployed at cost of unemployment benefitSTILL CARD 53Now imagine there is a fixed amount of money that can be spent on tackling unemployment. Would you be against or in favour of the government spending more on education and training programs for the unemployed at the cost of reducing unemployment benefit?',
 'Benefits for parents to combine work and family even if means higher taxesSTILL CARD 53Would you be against or in favour of the government introducing extra social benefits and services to make it easier for working parents to combine work and family life even if it means much higher taxes for all?',
 'Against or In favour of a basic income schemeCARD 54Some countries are currently talking about introducing a basic income scheme. In a moment I will ask you to tell me whether you are against or in favour of this scheme. First, I will give you some more details. The highlighted box at the top of this card shows the main features of the scheme. A basic income scheme includes all of the following: ...READ OUT...- The government pays everyone a monthly income to cover essential living costs. - It replaces many other social benefits. - The purpose is to guarantee everyone a minimum standard of living. - Everyone receives the same amount regardless of whether or not they are working. - People also keep the money they earn from work or other sources. - This scheme is paid for by taxes. INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO GIVE THE RESPONDENT TIME TO READ CARD. Overall, would you be against or in favour of having this scheme in [country]?Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of the card.',
 'Against or In favour of European Union-wide social benefit schemeCARD 55It has been proposed that there should be a European Union-wide social benefit scheme for all poor people. In a moment I will ask you to tell me whether you are against or in favour of this scheme. First, look at the highlighted box at the top of this card, which shows the main features of the scheme. A European Union-wide social benefit scheme includes all of the following: ...READ OUT...- The purpose is to guarantee a minimum standard of living for all poor people in the European Union. - The level of social benefit people receive will be adjusted to reflect the cost of living in their country. - The scheme would require richer European Union countries to pay more into such a scheme than poorer European Union countries. INTERVIEWER: PAUSE TO GIVE THE RESPONDENT TIME TO READ CARD. Overall, would you be against or in favour of having such a European Union-wide social benefit scheme?Please choose your answer from the options at the bottom of the card.',
 'More decisions made by EU: level of benefits in [country] become higher or lowerCARD 56If more decisions were made by the European Union rather than by national governments, do you think the level of social benefits and services provided in [country] would become higher or lower?',
 'How likely unemployed and looking for work next 12 monthsCARD 57Using this card, please tell me how likely it is that during the next 12 months you will be unemployed and looking for work for at least four consecutive weeks?',
 "How likely not enough money for household necessities next 12 monthsSTILL CARD 57And during the next 12 months how likely is it that there will be some periods when you don't have enough money to cover your household necessities?Use the same card",
 'Would vote for [country] to remain member of European Union or leaveNow a question on a different topic.Imagine there were a referendum in [country] tomorrow about membership of the European Union. Would you vote for [country] to remain a member of the European Union or to leave the European Union?',
 'Would vote for [country] to remain member of European Union or leave, United KingdomNow we want to ask you a few questions on the EU referendum that was held in the United Kingdom in June 2016. This referendum was on whether the UK should remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union.If there were to be a new referendum tomorrow, would you vote for the UK to remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union? (United Kingdom)',
 'Would vote for [country] to become member of European Union or remain outsideNow a question on a different topic.Imagine there were a referendum in [country] tomorrow about membership of the European Union. Would you vote for [country] to become a member of the European Union or to remain outside the European Union?',
 'Number of people living regularly as member of householdIncluding yourself, how many people - including children - live here regularly as members of this household?WRITE IN NUMBER: ..',
 'GenderCODE SEX, respondent',
 'Gender of second person in householdCODE SEX (2. person in household)',
 'Gender of third person in householdCODE SEX (3. person in household)',
 'Gender of fourth person in householdCODE SEX (4. person in household)',
 'Gender of fifth person in householdCODE SEX (5. person in household)',
 'Gender of sixth person in householdCODE SEX (6. person in household)',
 'Gender of seventh person in householdCODE SEX (7. person in household)',
 'Gender of eighth person in householdCODE SEX (8. person in household)',
 'Gender of ninth person in householdCODE SEX (9. person in household)',
 'Gender of tenth person in householdCODE SEX (10. person in household)',
 'Gender of eleventh person in householdCODE SEX (11. person in household)',
 'Gender of twelfth person in householdCODE SEX (12. person in household)',
 'Year of birthAnd in what year were you born?',
 'Age of respondent, calculated',
 'Year of birth of second person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (2. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of third person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (3. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of fourth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (4. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of fifth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (5.person in household)',
 'Year of birth of sixth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (6. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of seventh person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (7. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of eighth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (8. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of ninth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (9. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of tenth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (10. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of eleventh person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (11. person in household)',
 'Year of birth of twelfth person in householdAnd in what year was he/she born? (12. person in household)',
 'Second person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (2. person in household)',
 'Third person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (3. person in household)',
 'Fourth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (4. person in household)',
 'Fifth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (5. person in household)',
 'Sixth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (6. person in household)',
 'Seventh person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (7. person in household)',
 'Eighth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (8. person in household)',
 'Ninth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (9. person in household)',
 'Tenth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (10. person in household)',
 'Eleventh person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (11. person in household)',
 'Twelfth person in household: relationship to respondentCARD 58Looking at this card, what relationship is he/she to you? (12. person in household)',
 'Interviewer code, lives with husband/wife/partnerINTERVIEWER REFER TO HOUSEHOLD GRID AND CODE:',
 'Relationship with husband/wife/partner currently living withCARD 59You just told me that you live with your husband/wife/partner. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your relationship to them?',
 'Relationship with husband/wife/partner currently living with, FinlandCARD 59You just told me that you live with your husband/wife/partner. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your relationship to them? (Finland)',
 'Relationship with husband/wife/partner currently living with, United KingdomCARD 59You just told me that you live with your husband/wife/partner. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your relationship to them? (United Kingdom)',
 'Ever lived with a partner, without being marriedAnd can I just check have you ever lived with a partner, without being married to them (or in a civil union)?',
 'Ever been divorced/had civil union dissolvedASK ALLCan I just check have you ever been divorced or had a civil union dissolved?',
 'Interviewer code, lives with husband/wife/partnerINTERVIEWER CODE:',
 'Interviewer code, respondent cohabitingINTERVIEWER CODE:',
 'Legal marital statusASK IF NOT LIVING WITH A HUSBAND/WIFE/PARTNER OR ARE COHABITING CARD 60This question is about your legal marital status not about who you may or may not be living with. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your legal marital status now?CODE ONE ONLY: PRIORITY CODE',
 'Legal marital status, FinlandASK IF NOT LIVING WITH A HUSBAND/WIFE/PARTNER OR ARE COHABITING CARD 60This question is about your legal marital status not about who you may or may not be living with. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your legal marital status now? (Finland)CODE ONE ONLY: PRIORITY CODE',
 'Legal marital status, United KingdomASK IF NOT LIVING WITH A HUSBAND/WIFE/PARTNER OR ARE COHABITING CARD 60This question is about your legal marital status not about who you may or may not be living with. Which one of the descriptions on this card describes your legal marital status now? (United Kingdom)CODE ONE ONLY: PRIORITY CODE',
 'Legal marital status, post codedPOST CODE: MARITAL STATUS',
 'Children living at home or notCODE ALLINTERVIEWER REFER TO HOUSEHOLD GRID AND CODE:',
 "Ever had children living in householdHave you ever had any children of your own, step-children, adopted children, foster children or a partner's children living in your household?",
 "Domicile, respondent's descriptionASK ALL CARD 61Which phrase on this card best describes the area where you live?",
 'Highest level of education, ES - ISCEDGenerated variable: Highest level of education, ES - ISCED',
 'Highest level of educationCARD 63What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed?Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, AustriaCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Austria)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, BelgiumCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Belgium)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, SwitzerlandCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Switzerland)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, CzechiaCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Czechia)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, Germany: höchster allgemeinbildender SchulabschlussCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Germany 1)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, Germany: höchster StudienabschlussCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Germany 2)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, Germany: höchster AusbildungsabschlussCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Germany 3)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, EstoniaCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Estonia)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, SpainCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Spain)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, FinlandCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Finland)Please use this card',
 'Highest level of education, FranceCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (France)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to 2 or more A-levels or equivalentCARD 62aWhat is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (United Kingdom 1)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to Ph.D or equivalentCARD 62bWhat is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (United Kingdom 2)Please use this card.',
 'Age when completed full time education, United KingdomHow old were you when you completed your continuous full-time education? (United Kingdom)',
 'Highest level of education, HungaryCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Hungary)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, IrelandCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Ireland)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, Israeli education, IsraelCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Israel 1)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, Russian education, IsraelCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Israel 2)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, IcelandCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Iceland)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, ItalyCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Italy)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, LithuaniaCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Lithuania)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, NetherlandsCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Netherlands)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, NorwayCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Norway)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, PolandCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Poland)Please use this card',
 'Tertiary education: lower or higher/single tier, Poland',
 'Highest level of education, PortugalCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Portugal)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, Russian FederationCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Russian Federation)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, SwedenCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Sweden)Please use this card.',
 'Highest level of education, SloveniaCARD 62What is the highest level of education you have successfully completed? (Slovenia)Please use this card.',
 'Years of full-time education completedASK ALLAbout how many years of education have you completed, whether full-time or part-time? Please report these in full-time equivalents and include compulsory years of schooling.INTERVIEWER NOTE: round answer up or down to the nearest whole year. WRITE IN: ..',
 'Doing last 7 days: paid workCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? In paid work (or away temporarily) (employee, self-employed, working for your family business)Select all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: educationCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? In education (not paid for by employer) even if on vacationSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: unemployed, actively looking for jobCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? Unemployed and actively looking for a jobSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: unemployed, not actively looking for jobCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? Unemployed, wanting a job but not actively looking for a jobSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: permanently sick or disabledCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? Permanently sick or disabledSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: retiredCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? RetiredSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: community or military serviceCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? In community or military serviceSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: housework, looking after children, othersCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? Doing housework, looking after children or other personsSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: otherCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? OtherSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Doing last 7 days: refusalCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? RefusalSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 "Doing last 7 days: don't knowCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? Don't knowSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 'Doing last 7 days: no answerCARD 63Using this card, which of these descriptions applies to what you have been doing for the last 7 days? No answerSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Interviewer code, one/more than one doing last 7 daysINTERVIEWER CODE:',
 'Main activity last 7 daysASK IF MORE THAN ONE CODED IN F17b (code 1) STILL CARD 63And which of these descriptions best describes your situation (in the last seven days)?Please select only one. CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'Main activity, last 7 days. All respondents. Post codedPOST CODE: MAIN ACTIVITY',
 'Interviewer code, respondent in paid workCODE ALLINTERVIEWER REFER TO F17a AND CODE:',
 'Control paid work last 7 daysCan I just check, did you do any paid work of an hour or more in the last seven days?',
 'Ever had a paid jobASK IF NO OR DON?T KNOW/REFUSAL AT F18 (codes 2, 7 or 8)Have you ever had a paid job?',
 'Year last in paid jobASK IF YES AT F19 (code 1)In what year were you last in a paid job?WRITE IN YEAR: ....',
 'Employment relationIn your main job are/were you...READ OUT...',
 'Number of employees respondent has/hadASK IF SELF-EMPLOYED (code 2 at F21)How many employees (if any) do/did you have?WRITE IN number of employees',
 "Employment contract unlimited or limited durationASK IF EMPLOYEE OR FAMILY BUSINESS OR DON'T KNOW/REFUSALS (codes 1, 3, 7, 8 at F21)Do/did you have a work contract of ...READ OUT...",
 'Establishment sizeASK ALL WORKING/PREVIOUSLY WORKEDIncluding yourself, about how many people are/were employed at the place where you usually work/worked?READ OUT...',
 'Responsible for supervising other employeesIn your main job, do/did you have any responsibility for supervising the work of other employees?',
 'Number of people responsible for in jobASK IF YES AT F25 (code 1)How many people are/were you responsible for?WRITE IN: .....',
 'Allowed to decide how daily work is organisedASK ALL WORKING/PREVIOUSLY WORKED CARD 64I am going to read out a list of things about your working life. Using this card, please say how much the management at your work allows/allowed you... ...to decide how your own daily work is/was organised?READ OUT',
 'Allowed to influence policy decisions about activities of organisationASK ALL WORKING/PREVIOUSLY WORKED CARD 64I am going to read out a list of things about your working life. Using this card, please say how much the management at your work allows/allowed you... ...to influence policy decisions about the activities of the organisation?READ OUT',
 "Total contracted hours per week in main job overtime excludedWhat are/were your total 'basic' or contracted hours each week (in your main job), excluding any paid and unpaid overtime?INTERVIEWER: 0 hours contract should be coded as 0 hours. Acceptable range of responses is between 0 and 168 hours. WRITE IN HOURS: ...",
 "Have a set 'basic' or contracted number of hoursPOST CODE: Set 'basic' or contracted number of hours",
 'Total hours normally worked per week in main job overtime includedRegardless of your basic or contracted hours, how many hours do/did you normally work a week (in your main job), including any paid or unpaid overtimeINTERVIEWER: Acceptable range of responses is between 0 and 168 hours. WRITE IN HOURS: ...',
 'Industry, NACE rev.2What does/did the firm/organisation you work/worked for mainly make or do?WRITE IN',
 'What type of organisation work/worked forCARD 65Which of the types of organisation on this card do/did you work for?CODE ONE ANSWER ONLY',
 'Occupation, ISCO08What is/was the name or title of your main job? In your main job, what kind of work do/did you do most of the time? What training or qualifications are/were needed for the job?WRITE IN',
 'Paid work in another country, period more than 6 months last 10 yearsIn the last 10 years have you done any paid work in another country for a period of 6 months or more?',
 'Ever unemployed and seeking work for a period more than three monthsASK ALLHave you ever been unemployed and seeking work for a period of more than three months?',
 'Any period of unemployment and work seeking lasted 12 months or moreASK IF YES AT F36 (code 1)Have any of these periods lasted for 12 months or more?',
 'Any period of unemployment and work seeking within last 5 yearsHave any of these periods been within the past 5 years?NOTE TO INTERVIEWER: these periods refer to the periods of more than 3 months at F36',
 'Member of trade union or similar organisationASK ALLAre you or have you ever been a member of a trade union or similar organisation?',
 'Main source of household incomeCARD 66Please consider the income of all household members and any income which may be received by the household as a whole. What is the main source of income in your household?Please use this card',
 "Household's total net income, all sourcesCARD 67Using this card, please tell me which letter describes your household's total income, after tax and compulsory deductions, from all sources? If you don't know the exact figure, please give an estimate. Use the part of the card that you know best: weekly, monthly or annual income.",
 "Feeling about household's income nowadaysCARD 68Which of the descriptions on this card comes closest to how you feel about your household's income nowadays?",
 "Partner's highest level of education, ES - ISCEDGenerated variable: Partner's highest level of education, ES - ISCED",
 "Partner's highest level of educationCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed?Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, AustriaCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Austria)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, BelgiumCARD 69What is the highes level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Belgium)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, SwitzerlandCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Switzerland)Please use this card",
 "Partner's highest level of education, CzechiaCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Czechia)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Germany: höchster allgemeinbildender SchulabschlussCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Germany 1)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Germany: höchster StudienabschlussCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Germany 2)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Germany: höchster AusbildungsabschlussCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Germany 3)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, EstoniaCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Estonia)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, SpainCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Spain)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, FinlandCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Finland)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, FranceCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (France)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to 2 or more A-levels or equivalentCARD 69aWhat is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (United Kingdom 1)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to Ph.D or equivalentCARD 69bWhat is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (United Kingdom 2)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's age when completed full time education, United KingdomHow old was your husband/wife/partner when they completed continuous full-time education? (United Kingdom)",
 "Partner's highest level of education, HungaryCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Hungary)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, IrelandCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Ireland)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Russian education, IsraelCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Israel 2)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Israeli education, IsraelCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Israel 1)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, IcelandCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Iceland)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, ItalyCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Italy)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, LithuaniaCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Lithuania)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, NetherlandsCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Netherlands)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, NorwayCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Norway)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, PolandCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Poland)Please use this card",
 "Partner's tertiary education: lower or higher/single tier, Poland",
 "Partner's highest level of education, PortugalCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Portugal)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, Russian FederationCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Russian Federation)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, SwedenCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Sweden)Please use this card.",
 "Partner's highest level of education, SloveniaCARD 69What is the highest level of education your husband/wife/partner has successfully completed? (Slovenia)Please use this card.",
 'Partner doing last 7 days: paid workCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? In paid work (or away temporarily) (employee, self-employed, working for your family business)Select all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: educationCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? In education (not paid for by employer) even if on vacationSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: unemployed, actively looking for jobCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Unemployed and actively looking for a jobSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: unemployed, not actively looking for jobCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Unemployed, wanting a job but not actively looking for a jobSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: permanently sick or disabledCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Permanently sick or disabledSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: retiredCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? RetiredSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: community or military serviceCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? In community or military serviceSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: housework, looking after children, othersCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Doing housework, looking after children or other personsSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: otherCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? OtherSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: not applicableCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Not applicableSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Partner doing last 7 days: refusalCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? RefusalSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 "Partner doing last 7 days: don't knowCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? Don't knowSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY",
 'Partner doing last 7 days: no answerCARD 70Which of the descriptions on this card applies to what he/she has been doing for the last 7 days? No answerSelect all that apply. PROMPT Which others? CODE ALL THAT APPLY',
 'Interviewer code, one/more than one doing partner last 7 daysINTERVIEWER CODE:',
 "Partner's main activity last 7 daysSTILL CARD 70And which of the descriptions on this card best describes his/her situation (in the last 7 days)?Please select only one",
 'Interviewer code, Respondents partner in paid workINTERVIEWER REFER TO f45a AND CODE:',
 'Partner, control paid work last 7 daysCan I just check, did he/she do any paid work (of an hour or more) in the last 7 days?',
 'Occupation partner, ISCO08ASK IF PARTNER IN PAID WORK (code 01 at F45d or code 1 at F46)What is the name or title of his/her main job? In his/her main job, what kind of work does he/she do most of the time? What training or qualifications are needed for the job?WRITE IN',
 "Partner's employment relationIn his/her main job is he/she...READ OUT",
 'Hours normally worked a week in main job overtime included, partnerHow many hours does he/she normally work a week (in his/her main job)? Please include any paid or unpaid overtime.WRITE IN HOURS: ...',
 "Father's highest level of education, ES - ISCEDGenerated variable: Father's highest level of education, ES - ISCED",
 "Father's highest level of educationASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed?Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, AustriaASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Austria)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, BelgiumASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Belgium)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, SwitzerlandASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Switzerland)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, CzechiaASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Czechia)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Germany: höchster allgemeinbildender SchulabschlussASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Germany 1)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Germany: höchster StudienabschlussASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Germany 2)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Germany: höchster AusbildungsabschlussASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Germany 3)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, EstoniaASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Estonia)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, SpainASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Spain)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, FinlandASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Finland)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, FranceASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (France)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to 2 or more A-levels or equivalentASK ALL CARD 71aWhat is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (United Kingdom 1)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to Ph.D or equivalentASK ALL CARD 71aWhat is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (United Kingdom 2)Please use this card.",
 "Father's age when completed full time education, United KingdomHow old was your father when he completed continuous full-time education? (United Kingdom)",
 "Father's highest level of education, HungaryASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Hungary)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, IrelandASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Ireland)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Israeli education, IsraelASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Israel 1)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Russian education, IsraelASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Israel 2)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, IcelandASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Iceland)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, ItalyASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Italy)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, LithuaniaASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Lithuania)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, NetherlandsASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Netherlands)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, NorwayASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Norway)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, PolandASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Poland)Please use this card",
 "Father's highest level of education, PortugalASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Portugal)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, Russian FederationASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Russian Federation)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, SwedenASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Sweden)Please use this card.",
 "Father's highest level of education, SloveniaASK ALL CARD 71What is the highest level of education your father successfully completed? (Slovenia)Please use this card.",
 "Father's employment status when respondent 14When you were 14, did your father work as an employee, was he self-employed, or was he not working then?",
 "Father's occupation when respondent 14CARD 72Which of the descriptions on this card best describes the sort of work he did when you were 14?",
 "Mother's highest level of education, ES - ISCEDGenerated variable: Mother's highest level of education, ES - ISCED",
 "Mother's highest level of educationASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed?Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, AustriaASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Austria)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, BelgiumASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Belgium)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, SwitzerlandASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Switzerland)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, CzechiaASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Czechia)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Germany: höchster allgemeinbildender SchulabschlussASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Germany 1)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Germany: höchster StudienabschlussASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Germany 2)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Germany: höchster AusbildungsabschlussWhat is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Germany 3)",
 "Mother's highest level of education, EstoniaASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Estonia)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, SpainASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Spain)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, FinlandASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Finland)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, FranceASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (France)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to 2 or more A-levels or equivalentASK ALL CARD 73aWhat is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (United Kingdom 1)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, United Kingdom: Up to Ph.D or equivalentASK ALL CARD 73bWhat is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (United Kingdom 2)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's age when completed full time education, United KingdomHow old was your mother when she completed continuous full-time education? (United Kingdom)",
 "Mother's highest level of education, HungaryASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Hungary)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, IrelandASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Ireland)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Israeli education, IsraelASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Israel 1)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Russian education, IsraelASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Israel 2)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, IcelandASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Iceland)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, ItalyASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Italy)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, LithuaniaASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Lithuania)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, NetherlandsASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Netherlands)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, NorwayASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Norway)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, PolandASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Poland)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, PortugalASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Portugal)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, Russian FederationASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Russian Federation)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, SwedenASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Sweden)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's highest level of education, SloveniaASK ALL CARD 73What is the highest level of education your mother successfully completed? (Slovenia)Please use this card.",
 "Mother's employment status when respondent 14When you were 14, did your mother work as an employee, was she self-employed, or was she not working then?",
 "Mother's occupation when respondent 14CARD 74Which of the descriptions on this card best describes the sort of work she did when you were 14?",
 'Improve knowledge/skills: course/lecture/conference, last 12 monthsASK ALLDuring the last twelve months, have you taken any course or attended any lecture or conference to improve your knowledge or skills for work?',
 'First ancestry, European Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic GroupsCARD 75How would you describe your ancestry? Ancestry 1Please use this card to choose up to two ancestries that best apply to you. INTERVIEWER: code maximum of two ancestries in total. If more than two are mentioned, ask respondent to select two. If respondent is unable to do this, code first two ancestries mentioned. INTERVIEWER PROBE ONCE: Which other?',
 'Second ancestry, European Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic GroupsCARD 75How would you describe your ancestry? Ancestry 2Please use this card to choose up to two ancestries that best apply to you. INTERVIEWER: code maximum of two ancestries in total. If more than two are mentioned, ask respondent to select two. If respondent is unable to do this, code first two ancestries mentioned. INTERVIEWER PROBE ONCE: Which other?',
 'Region',
 'Regional unitLevel of regional unit',
 'Place of interview: East, West GermanyInterview in East or West Germany',
 'Important to think new ideas and being creativeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. Thinking up new ideas and being creative is important to her/him. She/he likes to do things in her/his own original way.',
 'Important to be rich, have money and expensive thingsNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to be rich. She/he wants to have a lot of money and expensive things.',
 'Important that people are treated equally and have equal opportunitiesNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he thinks it is important that every person in the world should be treated equally. She/he believes everyone should have equal opportunities in life.',
 "Important to show abilities and be admiredNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It's important to her/him to show her/his abilities. She/he wants people to admire what she/he does.",
 'Important to live in secure and safe surroundingsNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to live in secure surroundings. She/he avoids anything that might endanger her/his safety.',
 'Important to try new and different things in lifeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he likes surprises and is always looking for new things to do. She/he thinks it is important to do lots of different things in life.',
 "Important to do what is told and follow rulesNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he believes that people should do what they're told. She/he thinks people should follow rules at all times, even when no-one is watching.",
 'Important to understand different peopleNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to listen to people who are different from her/him. Even when she/he disagrees with them, she/he still wants to understand them.',
 'Important to be humble and modest, not draw attentionNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to be humble and modest. She/he tries not to draw attention to herself/himself.',
 "Important to have a good timeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. Having a good time is important to her/him. She/he likes to 'spoil' herself/himself.",
 'Important to make own decisions and be freeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to make her/his own decisions about what she/he does. She/he likes to be free and not depend on others.',
 "Important to help people and care for others well-beingNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It's very important to her/him to help the people around her/him. She/he wants to care for their well-being.",
 'Important to be successful and that people recognize achievementsNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. Being very successful is important to her/him. She/he hopes people will recognise her/his achievements.',
 'Important that government is strong and ensures safetyNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him that the government ensures her/his safety against all threats. She/he wants the state to be strong so it can defend its citizens.',
 'Important to seek adventures and have an exciting lifeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he looks for adventures and likes to take risks. She/he wants to have an exciting life.',
 'Important to behave properlyNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him always to behave properly. She/he wants to avoid doing anything people would say is wrong.',
 'Important to get respect from othersNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to get respect from others. She/he wants people to do what she/he says.',
 'Important to be loyal to friends and devote to people closeNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. It is important to her/him to be loyal to her/his friends. She/he wants to devote herself/himself to people close to her/him.',
 'Important to care for nature and environmentNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he strongly believes that people should care for nature. Looking after the environment is important to her/him.',
 'Important to follow traditions and customsNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. Tradition is important to her/him. She/he tries to follow the customs handed down by her/his religion or her/his family.',
 'Important to seek fun and things that give pleasureNow I will briefly describe some people. Please listen to each description and tell me how much each person is or is not like you. Use this card for your answer. She/he seeks every chance she/he can to have fun. It is important to her/him to do things that give her/him pleasure.',
 'Start of interview, day of month',
 'Start of interview, month',
 'Start of interview, year',
 'Start of interview, hour',
 'Start of interview, minute',
 'End of interview, day of month',
 'End of interview, month',
 'End of interview, year',
 'End of interview, hour',
 'End of interview, minute',
 'Interview length in minutes, main questionnaireInterview length in minutes, main questionnaire (calculated)']